feat: assertions rules (#489)
Redocly/openapi-cli: docs/resources/rules/assertions.md

# `assertions`

> Configure assertions to enforce your API design standards without coding custom rules.

Author: @skadinna Yes, I thinks we can start with your explanation, it's good enough! Thank you!

> Configure assertions to enforce your API design standards without coding custom rules.

Author: Put your text after the first yaml example

> Configure assertions to enforce your API design standards without coding custom rules.

Reviewer: It's good explanation @skadinna. I would fix it a bit:

> the linter shows you a warning message in the log

change to:

the linter shows you a warning or error message in the log."

Define `assertions` in the rules map of the lint section of the configuration file.

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions: ...
```

Property | Type | Description
-- | -- | --
assertions | [[Assertion object]](#assertion-object) | A list of assertions to enforce your custom API design standards. Add or edit your assertions in the configuration file. The `assertions` rule is composed of a list of `assertion` objects. This rule may result in more than one problem message as you may define more than one assertion. More than one assertion may be defined, and an assertion may have more than one assert.

## Assertion object

Property | Type | Description
-- | -- | --

> subject | `string` \| [`string`] | **REQUIRED.** The [OpenAPI node type](#openapi-node-types) that the the lint subjects to its evaluation. Use with `context` for more control.

Author: I think both variants are ok, lets leave as it is if you don't mind.

> subject | `string` \| [`string`] | **REQUIRED.** The [OpenAPI node type](#openapi-node-types) that the the lint subjects to its evaluation. Use with `context` for more control.

Reviewer: I would simplify. It sounds too complicated to me too.

property | `string` \| [`string`] \| null | Property name corresponding to the [OpenAPI node type](#openapi-node-types). If a list of properties is provided, assertions will evaluate against each property in the sequence. If not provided (or null), assertions will evaluate against the key names for the subject node type. See [property example](#property-example).
context | [Context object](#context-object) | The context influences evaluation for assertions. When `matchParentKeys` or `excludeParentKeys` is used in the `context` object, it evaluates the specified subset of the subject type. The resolution of reference objects is done at the context level. If no context is provided, it evaluates the assertion for all instances of the given type. See [context example](#context-example). 

> message | `string` | Problem message displayed if the assertion is false.

Author: So all that fields are optional. I'll add explanation about default values

> message | `string` | Problem message displayed if the assertion is false.

Reviewer: I suppose they will see some default message. right?

> message | `string` | Problem message displayed if the assertion is false.

Author: yes, there is default `message`. All that things already added.

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: PathItem
        message: Every path item must have a GET operation.
        required: 
          - get
```

The following example asserts that Tags have both name and description defined.

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: Tag
        property:
          - name
          - description
        message: Every tag must have a name and description.
        defined: true
```

Another way to compose that rule is to require the subject keys:

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: Tag
        message: Every tag must have a name and description.
        required:
          - name
          - description
```

### `context` example

The following example asserts that PUT responses with HTTP status 200 or 201 cannot return an `application/pdf`content type.
Without the `context`, the assertion would evaluate every MediaTypeMap including:
- Responses with all codes, including codes other than 200 or 201
- Responses for all HTTP methods, including DELETE, GET, POST, and more.
To restrict the evaluation, use the `context` feature to limit what will be evaluated.

```yaml

> - context:

Reviewer 2: issue: this example looks incomplete - it doesn't show where to place `context` in the `lint` section. It should be on the level of a single assertion, right?

Author: yes, it should be on the level of a single assertion, so I can add `assertions` at the top:
```suggestion
assertions:
  - context:
```

Author: already added assertions at the top

      - subject: Operation
        property: summary
        message: Summary should match a regex
        severity: error
        pattern: /test/
```

### `casing` example

The following example asserts the casing style is `PascalCase` for NamedExamples map keys.

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: NamedExamples
        message: NamedExamples key must be in PascalCase
        severity: error
        casing: PascalCase
```

Casing supports the following styles: 
- camelCase
- COBOL-CASE
- flatcase
- kebab-case
- snake_case
- PascalCase
- MACRO_CASE

### `mutuallyExclusive` example

The following example asserts the operation `description` and `externalDocs` must be mutually exclusive.
This assert runs only on node's keys.

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: Operation
        message: "Operation must not define both properties together: description and externalDocs"
        severity: error
        mutuallyExclusive:
          - description
          - externalDocs
```

### `mutuallyRequired` example

The following example asserts that a response body schema must have both `amount` and `currency` properties (and not either one by itself).

> This assertion runs only on node's keys.

Author: @skadinna Maybe something like this?
```suggestion
This assertion evaluates only node's properties keys, but not properties values.
```

> This assertion runs only on node's keys.

Reviewer: I like it more @ohorbachevskyi 👍 .

@skadinna how about you?

> This assertion runs only on node's keys.

Author: thnx, already added.

        undefined: true
```

### `nonEmpty` example

The following example asserts that the operation summary is not empty.

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: Operation
        property: summary
        message: Operation summary should not be empty
        severity: error
        nonEmpty: true
```

### `minLength` example

The following example asserts that the minimum length of each operation summary is 20 characters.

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: Operation
        property: summary
        message: Operation summary must have minimum of 20 chars length
        severity: error
        minLength: 20
```

### `maxLength` example

The following example asserts that the maximum length of each operation summary is 20 characters.

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: Operation
        property: summary
        message: Operation summary must have a maximum of 20 characters
        severity: error
        maxLength: 20
```

## OpenAPI node types

Redocly defines a type tree based on the document type.
OpenAPI 2.0 has one type tree.
OpenAPI 3.0 and OpenAPI 3.1 share a type tree.

### List of OpenAPI types

> Implementation of types for each specific OAS version:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For technical details on the implementation of types for each OAS version, consult the source files in the OpenAPI CLI repository:
```

subject | `string` \| [`string`] | **REQUIRED.** The [OpenAPI node type](#openapi-node-types) that the lint evaluates. Use with `context` for more control.
property | `string` \| [`string`] \| null | Property name corresponding to the [OpenAPI node type](#openapi-node-types). If a list of properties is provided, assertions will evaluate against each property in the sequence. If not provided (or null), assertions will evaluate against the key names for the subject node type. See [property example](#property-example).
context | [Context object](#context-object) | The context influences evaluation for assertions. When `matchParentKeys` or `excludeParentKeys` is used in the `context` object, it evaluates the specified subset of the subject type. The resolution of reference objects is done at the context level. If no context is provided, it evaluates the assertion for all instances of the given type. See [context example](#context-example). 
message | `string` | Optional problem message displayed if the assertion is false. By default displayed "The assertion doesn't meet required conditions".
suggest | [`string`] | Optional list of suggestions to display if the problem occurs.

> severity | `string` | The severity level of the problem if the assertion is false. It must be one of these values: `error`, `warn`, `off`. Optional field, default value is `error`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
severity | `string` | Optional field to configure the severity level of the problem if the assertion is false. It must be one of these values: `error`, `warn`, `off`. Default value is `error`.
```

> assertionId | `string` | Id which appears in the lint result if the assertion fails. It helps to define the assertion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
assertionId | `string` | ID displayed in the lint log if the assertion fails. Useful for troubleshooting and identifying the assertion.
```

```yaml values
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: Operation
        property: summary
        message: Summary must be one of the predefined values
        suggest:
          - change to 'My resource'
          - change to 'My collection'
        severity: error
        enum:
          - My resource
          - My collection
```

### `pattern` example

The following example asserts that the operation summary contains "test".

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: Operation
        property: summary
        message: Summary should match a regex
        severity: error
        pattern: /test/
```

### `casing` example

The following example asserts the casing style is `PascalCase` for NamedExamples map keys.

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: NamedExamples
        message: NamedExamples key must be in PascalCase
        severity: error
        casing: PascalCase
```

Casing supports the following styles: 
- camelCase
- COBOL-CASE
- flatcase
- kebab-case
- snake_case
- PascalCase
- MACRO_CASE

### `mutuallyExclusive` example

The following example asserts the operation `description` and `externalDocs` must be mutually exclusive.

> This assertion evaluates only node's properties keys, but not properties values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This assertion evaluates only property keys for the node, but not property values.
```

```yaml
lint:
  rules:
    assertions:
      - subject: Operation
        message: "Operation must not define both properties together: description and externalDocs"
        severity: error
        mutuallyExclusive:
          - description
          - externalDocs
```

### `mutuallyRequired` example

The following example asserts that a response body schema must have both `amount` and `currency` properties (and not either one by itself).

> This assertion evaluates only node's properties keys, but not properties values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This assertion evaluates only property keys for the node, but not property values.
```

message | `string` | Problem message displayed if the assertion is false.
suggest | [`string`] | List of suggestions to display if the problem occurs.
severity | `string` | The severity level of the problem if the assertion is false. It must be one of these values: `error`, `warn`, `off`. Default value is `error`.

> assertionId | `string` | Id which appears in the lint result if the assertion is false. It helps to define the assertion.

Reviewer: `if the assertion is false.` -> `if the assertion fails`
